docs: add spec for status protocol stack, deprecate waku-usage spec (#105)
vacp2p/rfc-index: status/raw/status-app-protocols.md

All Status messages MUST have one of these functional scopes:

**Global scope**

1. _Global control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features that all app users should be able to participate in. Examples include Contact Requests, Community Invites, global Status Updates, Group Chat Invites, etc.
2. _Global content_: messages carrying user-generated content for global functions. Examples include 1:1 chat messages, images shared over private group chats, etc.

**Community scope**

3. _Community control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features _only relevant to members of a specific community_. Examples include Community Membership Updates, community Status Updates, etc.
4. _Community content_: messages carrying user-generated content _only for members of a specific community_.

**Local scope**

5. _Local_: messages related to functions that are only relevant to a single user. Also known as _self-addressed messages_. Examples include messages used to exchange information between app installations, such as User Backup and Sync messages.

Note that the functional scope is a logical property of Status messages.

> It SHOULD however inform the underlying [transport layer sharding](#pubsub-topics-and-sharding) and [transport layer subscriptions](#subscribing) underneath the hood.

Reviewer: nitpick: _underlying_ and _underneath_ are redundant

Author: Thanks. Fixed in [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91)

In general a Status client SHOULD subscribe to participate in:
- all global functions,
- (only) the community functions for communities of which it is a member, and
- its own local functions.

### Content topics

Each Status app-level message MUST define a content topic that links messages in related app-level functions and sub-functions together.
This MUST be based on the filter use cases for [transport layer subscriptions](#subscribing)
and [retrieving historical messages](#retrieving-historical-messages).
A content topic SHOULD be identical across all messages that are always part of the same filter use case (or always form part of the same content-filtered query criteria).
In other words, the number of content topics defined in the app SHOULD match the number of filter use cases.
For the sake of illustration, consider the following common content topic and filter use cases:
- all messages belonging to the same 1:1 chat are always filtered together and therefore SHOULD use the same content topic (see [55/STATUS-1TO1-CHAT](../55/1to1-chat.md))

> - all messages belonging to the same Community are always filtered together and therefore SHOULD use the same content topic (see [56/STATUS-COMMUNITIES](../56/communities.md)).

Reviewer: > all messages belonging to the same Community are always filtered together.

As part of content topic revision for communities I'd like to challenge that. But it may not be the place. I just don't want this exemplary assumption to become axiomatic.

Author: I see your point. I've changed both statements to a conditional ("if...Community messages are always filtered together, they SHOULD use single content topic...") in [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91) to be less descriptive.

## End-to-end reliability layer

The end-to-end reliability layer contains the functions related to one of the two end-to-end reliability schemes defined for Status app messages:
1. Minimum Viable protocol for Data Synchronisation, or MVDS (see [STATUS-MVDS-USAGE](./status-mvds.md))
2. Scalable distributed log reliability (spec and a punchier name TBD, see the [original forum post announcement](https://forum.vac.dev/t/end-to-end-reliability-for-scalable-distributed-logs/293/16))

Ephemeral messages SHOULD omit this layer.
Non-ephemeral 1:1 chat messages SHOULD make use of MVDS to achieve reliable data synchronisation between the two parties involved in the communication.
Non-ephemeral private group chat messages build on a set of 1:1 chat links
and consequently SHOULD also make use of MVDS to achieve reliable data synchronisation between all parties involved in the communication.
Since MVDS does not scale for large number of participants in the communication,
non-ephemeral community messages MUST use scalable distributed log reliability as defined in this [original forum post announcement](https://forum.vac.dev/t/end-to-end-reliability-for-scalable-distributed-logs/293/16).

> The app MUST use a single channel ID per community.

Reviewer: Do we want to mention that non-ephemeral 1:1 chat messages MAY use e2e reliabilty protocol in the future?

Author: Yes! Done. [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91)

- `content_topic` MUST be set to the app-level content topic
- `timestamp` MUST be set to the current Unix epoch timestamp (in nanosecond precision)

### Pubsub topics and sharding

All Waku messages are published to pubsub topics as defined in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](../../waku/informational/23/topics.md).
Since pubsub topics define a routing layer for messages,
they can be used to shard traffic.
The pubsub topic used for publishing a message depends on the app-level [functional scope](#functional-scope).

**Self-addressed messages**

The application MUST define at least one distinct pubsub topic for self-addressed messages.
The application MAY defined a set of more than one pubsub topic for self-addressed messages to allow traffic sharding for scalability.

**Global messages**

The application MUST define at least one distinct pubsub topic for global control messages and global content messages.
The application MAY defined a set of more than one pubsub topic for global messages to allow traffic sharding for scalability.
It is RECOMMENDED that separate pubsub topics be used for global control messages and global content messages.

**Community messages**

> The application SHOULD define at least one separate pubsub topic for each separate community's community control and community content messages.

Author: Yes. Addressed in [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91)

The application MAY define a set of more than one pubsub topic per community to allow traffic sharding for scalability.

> It is RECOMMENDED that separate pubsub topics be used for global control messages and global content messages.

Author: Thanks! Addressed in [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91)

**Large messages**

The application MAY define separate pubsub topics for large messages.
These pubsub topics for large messages MAY be distinct for each functional scope.

### Resource usage

The application can use a range of Waku protocols to interact with the Waku transport layer.
The specific set of Waku protocols used depend on desired functionality and resource usage profile for the specific client.
Resources can be restricted in terms of bandwidth and computing resources.

> Waku protocols that are more appropriate for resource-restricted environments are often termed "light protocols".

Reviewer: I have started to write an explanation article about this. Will share draft when ready and we can start to move away from non-relay/light protocol terminology.

Author: Yes. I'm happy to also adapt to whatever terminology we deem best. In case it helps, reasoning behind my sticking with "light" and "full":
- people seemed to always revert to this, even while we pushed for "resource-restricted" and "adaptive"
- it fits current Status client terminology
- relay vs non-relay wouldn't be accurate as each client will (or should) use a combination of filter/lightpush/relay etc. depending on resources.

Waku protocols that consume more resources, but simultaneously contribute more to Waku infrastructure, are often termed "full protocols".
The terms "full" and "light" is just a useful abstraction than a strict binary, though,
and Status clients can operate along a continuum of resource usage profiles,
each using the combination of "full" and "light" protocols most appropriate to match its environment and motivations.

To simplify interaction with the selection of "full" and "light" protocols,

> Status clients MUST define a "full mode" and "light mode"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status clients MUST define a "full mode" and "light mode"
```
Same, I want to potentially propose alternative terminology. Will work on it and share draft.

to allow users to select whether their client would prefer "full protocols" or "light protocols" by default.

> Status Desktop clients are assumed to have more resources available and SHOULD use full mode by default.

Reviewer: > I think for user facing devices/apps it should be light by default (desktop could have a switch to enable full mode). In most users' experience, the same app in the different devices should mostly behave the same, there may be more features in a desktop environment, but by default we should make it consistent between devices.

Ultimately the question is for Status product team. But considering the desired properties, it is fair to assume that a desktop app may consume more resources. The same way it's fair to assume that using tor browser is slower, or using BitTorrent over FTP consumes more upload bandwidth.

If the Status product team decides that Desktop and Mobile must behave the same, and both must use light mode by default. Then the question is "where is the infrastructure"?

This can be compensated by either:
1.  encouraging users to run companion "nodes": a second software on your laptop, rasberry pi, cloud or enable relay mode
3.  Or having incentivization in place, where users or community owners pay for the resources of the network, with a large enough number of nodes to support this relay network

In this context, it also mean that by "default" privacy and censorship resistance are less than what they could be.

(1) is unlikely to be enough to allow the application to be reliable, as regularly stated.

(2) we are not ready yet, work is in progress and I expect to agressivly ramp up this stream in 2025 H1.

Once (2) is ready, then Status product will have a choice between:
A. Free product to use, but users share resources by default
B. Paying product for users, but they dont share resources by default.

(A) was clearly the selected direction so far by Status.

**Large messages**

Status clients (full or light) SHOULD NOT subscribe to topics set aside for large messages.
See [Large messages](#large-messages).

### Publishing

The application MUST publish user and app generated messages via the Waku transport layer.
The specific Waku protocol used for publishing depends on the resource-availability of the client:
1. Lightpush protocol, as specified in [19/WAKU2-LIGHTPUSH](../../waku/standards/core/19/lightpush.md) allows publishing to a pubsub topic via an intermediate "full node" and is more appropriate for resource-restricted publishing.
2. Relay protocol, as specified in [11/WAKU2-RELAY](../../waku/standards/core/11/relay.md), allows publishing directly into the relay routing network and is therefore more resource-intensive.

Full clients SHOULD use relay protocol to publish to pubsub topics matching the scopes:
1. Global control
2. Global content
3. Community control, for each community of which the app user is a member
4. Community content, for each community of which the app user is a member

Light clients SHOULD use lightpush protocol to publish control and content messages.

> **Self-addressed messages**

Reviewer: you can use h4 titles too `####`

Author: Yeah, I think it will be better. Switched to h4 in [9ce3bc5](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/105/commits/9ce3bc5700324e9172729808b4af9eb68d9a9a91)

Status clients (full or light) MUST use lightpush protocol to publish self-addressed messages.
See [Self-addressed messages](#self-addressed-messages).

**Large messages**

Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use lightpush protocols to publish to pubsub topics set aside for large messages.
See [Large messages](#large-messages).

### Retrieving historical messages

Status clients SHOULD use the store query protocol, as specified in [WAKU2-STORE](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md), to retrieve historical messages relevant to the client from store service nodes in the network.

Status clients SHOULD use [content filtered queries](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md#content-filtered-queries) with `include_data` set to `true`,
to retrieve the full contents of historical messages that the client may have missed during offline periods,
or to populate the local message database when the client starts up for the first time.

> **Store queries for reliability**

Reviewer: I think we should clean up reliability specs (my bad, I committed to do it and never got around to it) so we can refer to them here instead of restating logic.

Author: That will be great.

it SHOULD use [message hash lookup queries](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md#message-hash-lookup-queries) with `include_data` set to `true`
to retrieve the full contents of the missing messages based on the hash.

Status clients MAY use [presence queries](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md#presence-queries)
to determine if one or more message hashes known to the client is present in the store service node.
Clients MAY use this method to determine if a message that originated from the client
has been successfully stored.

**Self-addressed messages**

Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use store queries (rather than subscriptions) to retrieve self-addressed messages relevant to that client.
See [Self-addressed messages](#self-addressed-messages).

**Large messages**

Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use store queries (rather than subscriptions) to retrieve large messages relevant to that client.
See [Large messages](#large-messages).

### Providing services

Status clients MAY provide service-side protocols to other clients.

> Full clients SHOULD mount

Reviewer 2: we may want to mention `peerExchange` and `discv5` as well here

the filter service protocol (see [12/WAKU2-FILTER](../../waku/standards/core/12/filter.md))
and lightpush service protocol (see [19/WAKU2-LIGHTPUSH](../../waku/standards/core/19/lightpush.md))
in order to provide light subscription and publishing services to other clients 
for each pubsub topic to which they have a relay subscription.

> Status clients MAY mount the store query protocol as service node (see [WAKU2-STORE](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md))

Reviewer: Are we there yet?

Author: No, but I think the spec should provision for this possibility, but it will remain underspecified until we have a proper design for decentralised store.

to store historical messages and
provide store services to other clients
for each pubsub topic to which they have a relay subscription

### Self-addressed messages

Messages with a _local_ functional scope (see [Functional scope](#functional-scope)),
also known as _self-addressed_ messages,
MUST be published to a distinct pubsub topic or a distinct _set_ of pubsub topics
used exclusively for messages with local scope (see [Pubsub topics and sharding](#pubsub-topics-and-sharding)).

> Status clients (full or light) MUST use lightpush protocol to publish self-addressed messages (see [Publishing](#publishing)).

Reviewer: Shall we set expectations for the service node (eg usage of store sync over relay)?

Author: I think this is underdefined for now.

### Large messages

The application MAY define separate pubsub topics for large messages.
These pubsub topics for large messages MAY be distinct for each functional scope (see [Pubsub topics and sharding](#pubsub-topics-and-sharding)).
Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use lightpush protocols to publish to pubsub topics set aside for large messages (see [Publishing](#publishing)).
Status clients (full or light) SHOULD NOT subscribe to topics set aside for large messages (see [Subscribing](#subscribing)).
Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use store queries (rather than subscriptions) to retrieve large messages relevant to that client (see [Retrieving historical messages](#retrieving-historical-messages)).

**Chunking**

The Status application MAY use a chunking mechanism to break down large payloads
into smaller segments for individual Waku transport.
The definition of a large message is up to the application.
However, the maximum size for a [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](../../waku/standards/core/14/message.md) payload is 150KB.

> Status application payloads that exceed this size MUST be chunked into smaller pieces

Reviewer 2: isn't this statement contradicting in a way. 
it states that large payloads must be chunked and also considered for large messages which mean they use a dedicated large-messages pubsubtopic.

I am wondering if pubsubtopics/shards are going to be dedicated for large messages do we need to set the 150KB limit or increase it since clients anyways are not going to subscribe to these topics.

Reviewer: > it states that large payloads must be chunked and also considered for large messages which mean they use a dedicated large-messages pubsubtopic.

I expect large messages to be chunked, in more chunks.

> I am wondering if pubsubtopics/shards are going to be dedicated for large messages do we need to set the 150KB limit or increase it since clients anyways are not going to subscribe to these topics.

Fair q.

Author: > I am wondering if pubsubtopics/shards are going to be dedicated for large messages do we need to set the 150KB limit or increase it since clients anyways are not going to subscribe to these topics.

Indeed a fair question to consider in future, but I don't think needs to be defined right now. The point is that the total data transfer for large messages (whether in chunks or not) needs a designed mechanism to (1) prevent them from being broadcast to everyone (2) allow users to download ad-hoc.

---
title: STATUS-PROTOCOLS
name: Status Protocol Stack
status: raw
category: Standards Track

> description: Specifies the Status application protocol stack

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Specifies the Status application protocol stack.
```

editor: Hanno Cornelius <hanno@status.im>
contributors: 
- Jimmy Debe <jimmy@status.im>
- Aaryamann Challani <p1ge0nh8er@proton.me>

---

## Abstract

This specification describes the Status Application protocol stack.
It focuses on elements and features in the protocol stack for all application-level functions:
- functional scope (also _broadcast audience_)
- content topic
- ephemerality
- end-to-end reliability layer
- encryption layer
- transport layer (Waku)

It also introduces strategies to restrict resource usage, distribute large messages, etc.
Application-level functions are out of scope and specified separately. See:
- [55/STATUS-1TO1-CHAT](../55/1to1-chat.md)
- [56/STATUS-COMMUNITIES](../56/communities.md)

## Status protocol stack

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The keywords “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”,
“SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and
“OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).
```
Disclaimer could be placed here since this is used within the document.

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message WakuMessage {
  bytes payload = 1;
  string content_topic = 2;
  optional uint32 version = 3;
  optional sint64 timestamp = 10;
  optional bytes meta = 11;
  optional bool ephemeral = 31;
}
```

- `payload` MUST be set to the full encrypted payload received from the higher layers
- `version` MUST be set to `1`
- `ephemeral` MUST be set to `true` if the app-level message is ephemeral
- `content_topic` MUST be set to the app-level content topic
- `timestamp` MUST be set to the current Unix epoch timestamp (in nanosecond precision)

### Pubsub topics and sharding

All Waku messages are published to pubsub topics as defined in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](../../waku/informational/23/topics.md).
Since pubsub topics define a routing layer for messages,
they can be used to shard traffic.
The pubsub topic used for publishing a message depends on the app-level [functional scope](#functional-scope).

#### Self-addressed messages

The application MUST define at least one distinct pubsub topic for self-addressed messages.

> The application MAY defined a set of more than one pubsub topic for self-addressed messages to allow traffic sharding for scalability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The application MAY define a set of more than one pubsub topic for self-addressed messages to allow traffic sharding for scalability.
```

#### Global messages

The application MUST define at least one distinct pubsub topic for global control messages and global content messages.
The application MAY defined a set of more than one pubsub topic for global messages to allow traffic sharding for scalability.
It is RECOMMENDED that separate pubsub topics be used for global control messages and global content messages.

#### Community messages

The application SHOULD define at least one separate pubsub topic for each separate community's control and content messages.
The application MAY define a set of more than one pubsub topic per community to allow traffic sharding for scalability.
It is RECOMMENDED that separate pubsub topics be used for community control messages and community content messages.

#### Large messages

The application MAY define separate pubsub topics for large messages.
These pubsub topics for large messages MAY be distinct for each functional scope.

### Resource usage

> The application can use a range of Waku protocols to interact with the Waku transport layer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The application SHOULD use a range of Waku protocols to interact with the Waku transport layer.
```

Status Mobile clients are assumed to operate with more resource restrictions and SHOULD use light mode by default.

For the purposes of the rest of this document,
clients in full mode will be referred to as "full clients" and
clients in light mode will be referred to as "light clients".

### Subscribing

The application MUST subscribe to receive the traffic necessary for minimal app operation
and to enable the user functions specific to that instance of the application.

The specific Waku protocol used for subscription depends on the resource-availability of the client:
1. Filter client protocol, as specified in [12/WAKU2-FILTER](../../waku/standards/core/12/filter.md), allows subscribing for traffic with content topic granularity and is appropriate for resource-restricted subscriptions.
2. Relay protocol, as specified in [11/WAKU2-RELAY](../../waku/standards/core/11/relay.md), allows subscribing to traffic only with pubsub topic granularity and therefore is more resource-intensive. Relay subscription also allows the application instance to contribute to the overall routing infrastructure, which adds to its overall higher resource usage but benefits the ecosystem.

> Full clients SHOULD prefer relay protocol to subscribe to pubsub topics matching the scopes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED that full clients use relay protocol to subscribe to pubsub topics matching the scopes:
```

1. Lightpush protocol, as specified in [19/WAKU2-LIGHTPUSH](../../waku/standards/core/19/lightpush.md) allows publishing to a pubsub topic via an intermediate "full node" and is more appropriate for resource-restricted publishing.
2. Relay protocol, as specified in [11/WAKU2-RELAY](../../waku/standards/core/11/relay.md), allows publishing directly into the relay routing network and is therefore more resource-intensive.

Full clients SHOULD use relay protocol to publish to pubsub topics matching the scopes:
1. Global control
2. Global content
3. Community control, for each community of which the app user is a member
4. Community content, for each community of which the app user is a member

Light clients SHOULD use lightpush protocol to publish control and content messages.

#### Self-addressed messages

Status clients (full or light) MUST use lightpush protocol to publish self-addressed messages.
See [Self-addressed messages](#self-addressed-messages-4).

#### Large messages

Status clients (full or light) SHOULD use lightpush protocols to publish to pubsub topics set aside for large messages.
See [Large messages](#large-messages-4).

### Retrieving historical messages

> Status clients SHOULD use the store query protocol, as specified in [WAKU2-STORE](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md), to retrieve historical messages relevant to the client from store service nodes in the network.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Status clients SHOULD use the store query protocol, to retrieve historical messages relevant to the client from store service nodes in the network. For more information, see [WAKU2-STORE](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/blob/8fea97c36c7bbdb8ddc284fa32aee8d00a2b4467/standards/core/store.md).

```

editor: Hanno Cornelius <hanno@status.im>
contributors: 
- Jimmy Debe <jimmy@status.im>
- Aaryamann Challani <p1ge0nh8er@proton.me>

---

## Abstract

This specification describes the Status Application protocol stack.
It focuses on elements and features in the protocol stack for all application-level functions:

- functional scope (also _broadcast audience_)
- content topic
- ephemerality
- end-to-end reliability layer
- encryption layer
- transport layer (Waku)

It also introduces strategies to restrict resource usage, distribute large messages, etc.
Application-level functions are out of scope and specified separately. See:

- [55/STATUS-1TO1-CHAT](../55/1to1-chat.md)
- [56/STATUS-COMMUNITIES](../56/communities.md)

## Status protocol stack

The keywords “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”,
“SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and
“OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).
See the simplified diagram of the Status application protocol stack:

|  |
|---|
| Status application layer  |
| End-to-end reliability layer  |
| Encryption layer |

> | Transport layer (Waku) |

Author: Thanks! This is very helpful for my understanding. I included a section on "chunking large messages", but this should indeed be a separate layer with separate paragraph.

the functional scope for messages related to private group chats MUST be global.
As a counter-example, messages that originate within a community (and are _addressed_ to members of that community)
are only of interest to participants that are also members of that community.
Such messages MUST have a community-wide functional scope.
A third group of messages are addressed only to the participant that generated those messages itself.
These _self-addressed_ messages MUST have a local functional scope.

If we further make a distinction between "control" and "content" messages,
we can distinguish five distinct functional scopes.

All Status messages MUST have one of these functional scopes:

#### Global scope

1. _Global control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features that all app users should be able to participate in. Examples include Contact Requests, Community Invites, global Status Updates, Group Chat Invites, etc.
2. _Global content_: messages carrying user-generated content for global functions. Examples include 1:1 chat messages, images shared over private group chats, etc.

#### Community scope

> 3. _Community control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features _only relevant to members of a specific community_. Examples include Community Membership Updates, community Status Updates, etc.

Author: Thanks! I imagine this is based on some community description messages that are published "to everyone" - i.e. at least on shards that everyone is subscribed to and is not encrypted by the community key? In this case, these would still be modelled as "global" messages as they affect operations that everyone should be able to participate in. "Community control" refers to those messages that _can_ be distributed only within a single community.

> 3. _Community control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features _only relevant to members of a specific community_. Examples include Community Membership Updates, community Status Updates, etc.

Reviewer 4: Yes, that information is derived from `CommunityDescription`. Please note that `CommunityDescription` itself is never fully encrypted; only specific sub-elements, like members and channels, are encrypted depending on the context. Even so, these cards will render correctly, with the exception of member counts and active member counts, which remain inaccessible to users without the necessary key.

As for shards, `CommunityDescription` can reside within its own community shard. The protocol is designed to ensure that everyone can locate the shard a given community uses, enabling them to subscribe to that shard to access the description. Essentially, the community owner publishes `CommunityDescription` on the community shard and shares shard details on the default shard.
Rationale: https://github.com/status-im/status-go/issues/3961#issuecomment-1785453710
Issue: https://github.com/status-im/status-go/issues/4230
Implementation: https://github.com/status-im/status-go/pull/4499

> 3. _Community control_: messages enabling the basic functioning of the app to control features _only relevant to members of a specific community_. Examples include Community Membership Updates, community Status Updates, etc.

Author: Thanks! I think the issue here might be that _eventually_ we'd want Communities to be able to provide their own infrastructure - their own bootstrap nodes, Store nodes, etc. In this case we may not _want_ everyone to be able to retrieve the Community Description (which would require discovering and using that Communities internal service infrastructure). Of course, it will be easy to define a global shard only used for "discoverable" Community descriptions, so I don't think the spec prohibits either design.

## End-to-end reliability layer

The end-to-end reliability layer contains the functions related to one of the two end-to-end reliability schemes defined for Status app messages:

1. Minimum Viable protocol for Data Synchronisation, or MVDS (see [STATUS-MVDS-USAGE](./status-mvds.md))
1. Scalable distributed log reliability (spec and a punchier name TBD, see the [original forum post announcement](https://forum.vac.dev/t/end-to-end-reliability-for-scalable-distributed-logs/293/16))

Ephemeral messages SHOULD omit this layer.
Non-ephemeral 1:1 chat messages SHOULD make use of MVDS to achieve reliable data synchronisation between the two parties involved in the communication.
Non-ephemeral private group chat messages build on a set of 1:1 chat links
and consequently SHOULD also make use of MVDS to achieve reliable data synchronisation between all parties involved in the communication.
Non-ephemeral 1:1 and private group chat messages MAY make use of of [scalable distributed log reliability](https://forum.vac.dev/t/end-to-end-reliability-for-scalable-distributed-logs/293/16) in future.
Since MVDS does not scale for large number of participants in the communication,

> non-ephemeral community messages MUST use scalable distributed log reliability as defined in this [original forum post announcement](https://forum.vac.dev/t/end-to-end-reliability-for-scalable-distributed-logs/293/16).

Author: Indeed! I chose to exclude it (for now) as its future is uncertain.
